Paging and sorting in distributed systems, oh my! (#194)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/2020-01-27-paging-and-sorting-in-distributed-systems-oh-my.md

---
layout: post
header_image: /img/posts/paging-and-sorting-in-distributed-systems-oh-my/header.jpg
title: "Paging and sorting in distributed systems, oh my!"
author: Mauro Servienti

> synopsis: "Paging and sorting sound like a controversial and complex topic when it comes to displaying data in distributed systems; however, as not all that glitters is gold, not necessarily paging and sorting need to be complicated, even in distributed systems."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
synopsis: "Paging and sorting sound like a controversial and complex topic when it comes to displaying data; however, they don't need to be, even in distributed systems."
```

tags:
- SOA
- Services ViewModel Composition
category: view-model-composition
---

> Paging and sorting sound like a controversial and complex topic when it comes to displaying data in distributed systems; however, as not all that glitters is gold, not necessarily paging and sorting need to be complicated, even in distributed systems.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Paging and sorting sound like a controversial and complex topic when it comes to displaying data; however, they don't need to be, even in distributed systems.
```

In the [blog posts series about ViewModel Composition](/categories/view-model-composition) we used as a sample domain model a list of products composed by the following services:

* *Marketing* owns name and description
* *Sales* owns price
* *Warehouse* owns availability
* *Shipping* owns shipping options

When we faced for the first time [the darkness of ViewModels Lists Composition](/view-model-composition/2019/02/28/into-the-darkness-of-viewmodel-lists-composition.html), we said:

>"we could say that *Marketing/Product Catalog* is the one that makes decisions about the existence of a Product. Which means that from the business perspective, *Marketing* owns the concept of a Product."

In that article, we briefly identified what the process of composing a list is:

* *Marketing* loads the products list that, in the simplest case, is only a list of IDs.
* *Marketing* publishes an event to notify interested services that they can proceed with the composition process.

>Note: More details about the entire composition process are available in [The ViewModels Lists Composition Dance](/view-model-composition/2019/03/21/the-viewmodels-lists-composition-dance.html) article.

## Paging

> If *Marketing* is the logical owner of products and is also the one responsible for loading the products list, *Marketing* can easily be responsible for paging too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If *Marketing* is the logical owner of products and is also the one responsible for loading the product list, *Marketing* can easily be responsible for paging too.
```

> When a request, such as `/products?pageIndex=0&pageSize=10`, comes in *Marketing* uses the paging information to restrict the number of IDs loaded, and if required, to calculate the total amount of pages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a request, such as `/products?pageIndex=0&pageSize=10`, comes in, *Marketing* uses the paging information to restrict the number of IDs loaded, and if required, to calculate the total amount of pages.
```

> All the other services receive, in the event raised by *Marketing*, an already paged/trimmed list of products, making so that they do not need to be aware of any paging concern at all.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the event raised by *Marketing*, all the other services receive an already-paged/trimmed list of products. In other words, they do not need to be aware of any paging concern at all.
```

## Sorting

> Sorting, unfortunately, it's not so easy as paging. For simple sorting scenarios, like the one in which we need to sort by a single property, the approach might be straightforward. Might be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sorting, unfortunately, it's not as easy as paging. For simple sorting scenarios, like the one in which we need to sort by a single property, the approach might be straightforward. Might be.
```

When a request like `/products?orderBy=price` comes in what could happen is that:

* *Marketing* behaves the usual way, loading product IDs and publishing the corresponding event.

> * All other services, but *Sales*, react as usual loading data by product ID and composing the products list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* All other services but *Sales* react as usual, loading data by product ID and composing the product list.
```

* *Sales* loads products' prices, and once its part of the composition is complete, it sorts the list by price. *Sales* is the one that can handle the `orderBy` query string parameter when the value is `price`.

Unfortunately, such a simple approach immediately fails if services are invoked in parallel, like in our case. A service cannot directly change the order of something that is simultaneously touched by other services.

> If the request coming in is like `/products?orderBy=price,description` then sorting is not anymore so easy, even if we were allowed to sort the list directly. The problem, in this second scenario, is that *Sales* can sort by price, *Marketing* can sort by description, but what the request is asking for is different:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the request coming in is like `/products?orderBy=price,description` then sorting is not so easy, even if we were allowed to sort the list directly. The problem in this second scenario is that *Sales* can sort by price, *Marketing* can sort by description, but what the request is asking for is different:
```

>I want products sorted by price and then by description.

> Which, in essence, creates a kind of circular dependency between *Sales* and *Marketing*. *Marketing* must execute after *Sales*. Worse, it needs to know who already sorted data and how because of the "and then by" sort dependency. There is no way we can achieve this as *Marketing*, being the logical owner, is already executed first.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In essence, this creates a kind of circular dependency between *Sales* and *Marketing*. *Marketing* must execute after *Sales*. Worse, it needs to know who already sorted data and how because of the "and then by" sort dependency. There is no way we can achieve this as the *Marketing* endpoint, being the logical owner, has already executed.
```

The trick is to have a post-composition step in the composition pipeline designed to post-process the composition result.

> In the end, what we'd want to do is as simple as being able to do something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the end, what we want to do is as simple as:
```

If the ViewModel Composition engine was to expose a post-composition step like the following:

```csharp
interface ICompositionPostProcessor
{
   Task<dynamic> PostProcess(dynamic viewModel, HttpRequest request, ...);
}
```

We could inject an implementation like (pseudo-code):

```csharp
class CompositionPostProcessor : ...
{
   public Task<dynamic> PostProcess(dynamic viewModel, ...)
   {
      var sortedProducts = ((IEnumerable)viewModel).Cast<dynamic>();
      var sortCriteria = request.Query["orderBy"].Split(',');
      var isFirst = true;
      foreach(sortCriterion in sortCriteria)
      {
         //allSorters is IDictionary<string, IApplySorting>, e.g. injected via DI
         if(allSorters.TryGetValue(sortCriterion, out IApplySorting sorter))
         {
            sortedProducts = sorter.ApplySort(sortedProducts, isFirst);
            isFirst = false;
         }
      }

      return Task.FromResult(sortedProducts)
   }
}
```

A `sorter` is a class that implements an interface similar to the following:

```csharp
interface IApplySorting
{
   string OrderByCriterion{get;}
   IEnumerable<dynamic> ApplySort(IEnumerable<dynamic> data, bool executedFirst);
}
```

> And *Sales*, for example, could have the `ApplySort` implementation as simple as:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And *Sales*, for example, could have the `ApplySort` implementation as follows:
```

```csharp
IEnumerable<dynamic> ApplySort(IEnumerable<dynamic> data, bool executedFirst)
{
   if(executedFirst)
   {
      return data.OrderBy(item=>item.Price);
   }
   return data.ThenBy(item=>item.Price)
}
```

> The pseudo-code implementation uses in-memory LINQ to sort the composed list and uses the `executedFirst` argument to determine how to apply the sorting.

## Conclusion

> The composition process and the composition engine [are transparent to the way data are composed](/view-model-composition/2019/04/09/slice-it.html), and so they have to be the way paging and sorting affect the composed data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The composition process and the composition engine [are transparent to the way data are composed](/view-model-composition/2019/04/09/slice-it.html), so they have to be the way paging and sorting affect the composed data.
```

As we've seen, it's easy to implement paging by looking for the logical owner of the incoming request.

> With sorting, things are not easy, in any case. However, if the composition engine exposes the ability to plug-in a post-composition processor, there is an opportunity to design a sorting mechanism that preserves the services isolation and autonomy, and also is entirely transparent to the engine itself.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With sorting, things are not so easy. However, if the composition engine exposes the ability to plug-in a post-composition processor, there is an opportunity to design a sorting mechanism that preserves the services' isolation and autonomy, and also is entirely transparent to the engine itself.
```
